Hi, and welcome to the lesson
on multivariable regression.
In this lecture, we're gonna go over
some examples of how adjusting for
one variable can impact
the apparent relationship we see
of another variable on an outcome, okay?
And I think the easiest way to see this
is to look at a two group variable.
Take, for example,
a treatment versus a control or
something you might see in an AB test when
we're adjusting for a continuous variable.
So, lets just get started, we're gonna
go through a lot of examples and
I think you'll be surprised at
how different things can be
when you adjust for another variable.
In this slide,
I give you an example set of code
that I'm using to simulate the data and
create the plots.
From this point forward,
I won't show the code anymore, but
if you'd like to go through it,
it's all in the document.
Here's the first simulation.
In this case,
it's a pretty straightforward one.
Get my pen.
Okay, so in this case,
the horizontal lines show the.
Show the marginal effect of group status,
in this case,
there's one group colored red and
another group colored blue.
This shows the marginal
effect disregarding the x.
So if, for example, y was blood pressure
or something, then we would think that
if we hadn't factored in x, this would be
the mean for the group that, say, received
the treatment, and this would be the mean
for the group that got the control.
Now there's a pretty clear
linear relationship between
the outcome and the regressor.
So what we could do is fit
a model that looks like y = beta
naught + beta 1 times our
treatment indicator, 01 for
our treatment indicator,
+ beta 2 * x + epsilon.
This would fit two parallel lines.
Beta one would represent the change
in intercepts between the groups,
whereas beta two would be the common
slope that exists across the two groups.
If we were to do that, then beta one here,
the change in the intercept between
the two groups, would be right there.
It would be that distance.
And if you notice in this case, the
marginal effect, the effect that we have
if we disregard x, and the effect
that we have if we incorporate x in
a linear model and look at the change
in the intercepts, are about the same.
Another thing that I would note in this
example is that there's a lot of direct
evidence to compare our groups for
any given value of x.
If we were to bin x, say in a bin like
this, then we would have a lot of red and
blue circles to do a direct
comparison of the treatment for
kind of a fairly isolated level of x.
So this would be a good experiment.
This would be something that might happen
if we were to randomized treatment and
in the collection of xs for the red group
would look like the collection of xs for
the y group
Okay, this is just reiterating
some of those points.
Now let's try a setting where
it's gonna make a big difference.
So again,
my horizontal lines here show marginal
difference between my red treated
group and my blue control group.
However, if we were to fit that model and
look at the change in the intercepts,
we'd see this tiny difference down here,
this minimal difference, okay?
And so this is a case where we would
go from a massive treatment effect
to nothing when we accounted for x.
Another thing I would note about this
particular data set, if we knew that the x
value was one or smaller,
we know that you're in the blue group.
And if we know that you are 1.5 or
higher, we know that you were
in the red treated group.
So knowledge of x at some level pretty
much gives us perfect knowledge
of which treatment you received.
This is an important concept that goes to
something, the so-called propensity score,
but it basically goes to show that this is
the exact opposite of what would happen
if we had randomized, right?
In this case, if we randomize it would
be very hard to pick what treatment
you had based on your x level because
the x levels were all jumbled up.
Some of the high x levels
went to the treated,
some of the high x levels went to
the control, and so on, and so on.
In this case,
it would be an example where we
clearly didn't randomize, and which model
here is the right one to consider is
not really up for discussion for today.
What we're just talking
about today is about how
the inclusion of x can
change the estimate.
Now which is the right model to consider?
That is a different thing.
For example, this might occur, an example
of when this might occur is let's say
treatment is whether or not you're taking
some blood pressure medication, okay?
And y, your outcome,
is your blood pressure.
But suppose that the x variable was
cholesterol or
something highly related to whether or
not you would've gotten prescribed
this medication to begin with, okay?
Then you could see that adjusting for
x is really just adjusting for
the same sort of thing that would
lead you to have treatment.
So again, this is what makes
observational data analysis very hard
as opposed to instances where what you're
interested in has been randomized.
Okay, so this is an example,
just to reiterate this point,
this is an example where we had a strong
marginal effect when we disregarded x,
and a very subtle or a non-existent
effect when we accounted for x.
Let's try some different scenarios.
Again, this slide just
reiterates these points.
Oh, and
just to go back to this latter point,
we have no instances of overlap in the red
and blue groups to have direct evidence
of what's going on for
a specific value of x.
There's no value of x we can hold constant
and compare red versus blue directly.
So this is a bad setting,
where we're relying very heavily
on the model to compare the group.
Here's an instance where there
is some overlap right here.
There is some direct evidence right
there comparing the two groups.
But, it also is kind of a hard
case because if you look, here's
the marginal mean for the red group.
Here's the marginal mean for
the blue group.
There's a probably significant effect here
that says the red is higher than the blue.
However, we fit our model and
look at the change in the intercepts,
what we see is that the blue
is higher than the red.
So our adjusted estimate
is significant and
the exact opposite of our
unadjusted estimate, okay?
And again, during this lecture we're not
gonna talk about which one's the right
one, we're just gonna talk about
how this can obviously occur.
Here is a picture where you can
see exactly what's happening.
This phenomenon here is often
called Simpson's Paradox, and
the idea is you look at a variable
as it relates to an outcome,
and that effect reverses itself as
the inclusion of another variable.
That's often called Simpson's Paradox,
which basically just says
things can change to the exact
opposite when you perform adjustment,
which Is actually looking at this
picture not that surprising.
It's not a paradox whatsoever.
All right, let's try some other examples.
Again, the next slide's just
gonna reiterate these points.
In this example,
there's basically no marginal effect.
However, there's a huge effect
when we adjust for x so
this is a case where we went from, we saw
a case where we went from significant
effect to when we adjusted for x,
we got a non-significant effect.
Well, here's an instance where we had
a non-significant effect if we ignore x,
and then a significant effect
when we include x, okay?
So there's no simple rule that says
this is always what will happen with
adjustment.
Pretty much any permutation of going from
significant to non-significant, staying
both significant, staying non-significant,
flipping signs, all of them can occur.
Here's the final example like
this I'd like to show, and
this just considers an instance
where we would surely get this wrong
if we were to assume the slopes
were common across the two groups.
Obviously, the slopes are different.
And we know how to fit a model like this.
If we were to fit a model that said,
y = beta naught + beta 1
* our treatment effect,
+ beta 2 * x, + beta 3 treatment,
* x + epsilon.
That would fit two lines with different
intercepts and different slopes,
and we could get a fit
like to this data set.
Another important thing to ascertain for
this data set is there is no such
thing as a treatment effect.
If you look right here,
the red and the blue,
there's no evidence of a treatment effect.
If you look right here,
there's a big evidence that blue
has a higher outcome than red,
and if you look over here,
there's a lot of evidence that red
has a higher outcome than blue.
And the reason,
the interaction is the reason
that this main treatment effect
doesn't have a lot of meaning.
The end result is that this coefficient,
the coefficient in front of the treated
effects, which just spits out of course,
is not interpreted as
the treatment effect by itself.
You can't interpret that
number as a treatment effect.
As we can see from this picture,
there is no such thing as
a treatment effect for this data.
The treatment effect depends
on what level of x you're at.
So you can't just read
the term from the regression
output associated with the treatment and
act as if it's a treatment effect,
if in fact, you have
an interaction term in your model.
So that's an important point, but this
also just goes to show how adjustment can
really change things if you have a setting
like this where you have not just
adjustment, but so-called modification.
Okay, so
again that was a crazy simulation.
This just summarizes some of the points.
You often see interactions, but
you rarely see interactions that start,
but still, nonetheless, they can occur.
And then I want to reiterate that nothing
we've talked about is specific to having
a binary treatment and a continuous x.
In this case here,
we have our same outcome, y.
But in our x1 variable is continuous and
our x2 is continuous, but because
it's kinda hard to show 3 variables
at the same time, x2 is color coded.
So higher lighter values mean higher, and
more red darker values means lower, okay?
So in this case, if you look at this
plot you would say there isn't much of
a relationship between y and x1, however,
lets look at this in three dimensions,
and then I need a different setting.
I need something where I
can rotate the plot around.
So, I'm going to use RGL,
and it's pretty easy.
You can, this doesn't show how
I generated the x1, x2, and y,
that's in the mark down document, but
here, I'll show you how to get it.
So there's the plot or data set that's
equivalent cuz I reran the simulation.
And here's our plot.
So here's exactly that plot recreated,
just to orient you, my y is on this axis,
and my x1 is on this axis.
Now, however if I look,
if I turn this with x2, you
can see that most of the variation of y is
explained by this relationship with x2.
Okay, and
there is a small amount of sharing.
So if I try and get it just perfect,
you can see that there
is some variation left for
y once I've accounted for x2.
So let's look at that, and an easy way to
look at that without having to resort to
three dimensional plots, especially
which don't work if you move beyond two
variables, if you have three variables or
four variables, is to look at residuals.
So let's look at what happens
when we look at the residuals.
So here is the residual of y after having
removed x2, the linear effect of x2,
and the residual of x1 having
removed linear effect of x2.
And there you can see there's
a very strong relationship left
over between y and
x1 after having removed the effect of x2.
And the main point of
this slide right here and
the continuous variant is just to
show that there’s nothing specific
about the binary case other than
it’s kind of easy to visualize
that makes the same things not
occur in the continuous case.
We can get regression effects, reverse
themselves, get bigger, get smaller,
go from significant to not, from not
significant to significant, and all of
the possible permutations when we have two
or more multiple continuous regressors.
So some final thoughts, again, I want to
reiterate we haven't said what exactly is
the right model, because the two differ,
we need an answer, right?
And I would say the probably best
way to think about that is you
have to bring in some of the specific
subject matter, or clinical scientific
subject matter expertise into
your model building exercise.
Sometimes the treatment and
the other regressor are highly related,
but merely because they're related things,
that it isn't interesting to adjust for x.
So the fact that it causes the treatment
effect to go away isn't meaningful.
If I have systolic blood pressure in
a model, and I put diastolic blood
pressure in a model as well, that of
course, makes the first one go away.
But that's not interesting.
I know those two blood pressure
measurements are highly correlated.
Why should I have them both in the model?
And so to really understand this,
you need to have
a dynamic process of going back and
forth with the model fitting and
the subject matter and
scientific expertise bringing
its full force to bear on the model
building exercise to get sensible results.
But hopefully after this lecture,
you'll understand when you see
the adjustment cause your facts to change,
you'll maybe get a sense of how
that's occurring in the background.
Okay, and then for automated model
selection, which is another process that
you'll talk more about in your machine
learning class, that's a different thing.
And I don't think it's
particularly well suited for
painting interpretable coefficients.
It's data for obtaining good predictions
with respect to a loss function.
So that's a different process.
I think there's no substitute if you're
doing model building with a regular
data set where you want interpretable
coefficients to getting your hands dirty,
getting the team of people that
are working with on it together,
some with the right scientific expertise,
some with the statistical expertise, and
some with the computing expertise, and
so on, all together to fit the models.
And if there's a big change in
coefficients after different adjustment
strategies, well,
then those need to be discussed and
vetted and the benefits and
side effects, and
downsides of each of the models
should be discussed, okay.
So thank you for
listening to this lecture, and
I look forward to seeing
you in the next one.